Documentation for bot accounts (#2761)
mattermost/docs: source/developer/bot-accounts.rst

> .. _bot-accounts:

Reviewer: This should be on the TOC.

Bot Accounts
========================================

Use Bot Accounts to integrate with Mattermost through `plugins <https://developers.mattermost.com/extend/plugins/>`_ or the `Mattermost RESTful API <https://api.mattermost.com>`_. Bot accounts access the RESTful API on behalf of a bot through the use of the :doc:`personal access tokens feature <personal-access-tokens>`.

> // TODO screenshot. Waiting for bug fix where channel header is missing from bot DMs

Reviewer 2: TODO.

Author: Removing screenshot, resolving

Bot accounts are just like user accounts, except they:

>   - Cannot be logged into, and bypass all restrictions related to authentication, such as multi-factor authentication (MFA) and custom terms of service.

Reviewer 2: > bypass all restrictions related to authentication, such as multi-factor authentication (MFA) and custom terms of service

No they don't. Those things just don't apply to anything but regular logins which bots can't do anyway.

Author: Updated to just `Cannot be logged into.`

>   - Cannot be logged into, and bypass all restrictions related to authentication, such as multi-factor authentication (MFA), and custom terms of service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Cannot be logged into, and bypass all restrictions related to authentication, such as multi-factor authentication (MFA) and custom terms of service.
```

>   - Cannot be used to create other bot accounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Cannot be used to create other bot accounts.
```

>   - Do not count as a registered user and therefore do not count towards the total users for an Enterprise Edition license

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Do not count as a registered user and therefore do not count towards the total users for an Enterprise Edition license.
```

> Given bot accounts cannot be used to log in, they enable developers to create integrations that don’t require an email/password login or any other authentication method for their bots. This removes unnecessary attack surface caused by creating and in some cases circumventing authentication methods to create a bot account.

Reviewer 2: >  or any other authentication method

They still require authentication. Not sure what this is trying to say.

Author: How is this

```
Bot accounts are a safer way to integrate with Mattermost through the RESTful API and Plugin API because they cannot be used to log in. They enable developers to create integrations that don’t require an email/password login, removing an attack surface caused by creating and in some cases circumventing authentication methods to create a bot account.
```

In essence I want to tell admins 'you should use bot accounts because it makes your system more secure'

Reviewer 2: It's more secure because you don't have to manage shared logins to these accounts.

Author: Updated, see https://github.com/mattermost/docs/pull/2761/commits/a3533da93776e09daf86c34c78190d481726cda4

Additional benefits include:

>   - Bot accounts can post to any channel in the system, whether it’s a private team, private channel or a Direct Message channel. Access for bot accounts is controlled by System Administrators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Bot accounts can post to any channel in the system, whether it’s a private team, private channel or a direct message channel. Access for bot accounts is controlled by System Administrators.
```

>   - Bot accounts can post to any channel in the system, whether it’s a private team, private channel or a Direct Message channel. Access for bot accounts is controlled by System Administrators.

Reviewer 2: No they can't. They have to be added like any other user. It's just that plugins use their super override when using them so it looks like they can.

They can be assigned system admin permissions though.

Author: Propose `Bot accounts can be enabled to post to any channel in the system by System Administrators, including a private team, private channel or a Direct Message channel.`

Does this make it more clear that bots "can" post to any channels if they are configured to do so by the SysAdmin

Reviewer 2: Looks good.

  - Integrations created by a user and tied to a bot account no longer break if the user leaves the company.

>   - Once created, bot accounts are available to everyone on your server, and can be aded to teams and channels just like any regular user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Once created, bot accounts are available to everyone on your server, and can be added to teams and channels just like any regular user.
```

>   - Once created, bot accounts are available to everyone on your server, and can be added to teams and channels just like any regular user.

Reviewer 2: Well unless team isolation becomes a thing, then they would be siloed like a regular user.

Author: Would you like to update this sentence to reflect that?

Reviewer 2: Maybe: "Once created, bot accounts behave just like regular user accounts and are added to teams and channels...."

Author: Updated, see https://github.com/mattermost/docs/pull/2761/commits/a3533da93776e09daf86c34c78190d481726cda4

------------------------

By default, plugins can create and manage bot accounts. To enable bot account creation through the user interface or the RESTful API:

1. Go to **System Console > Integrations > Integration Features**.
2. Set **Enable Bot Account Creation** to true.

Once set, System Administrators can create bot accounts for integrations in **Integrations > Bot Accounts**.

Bot Account Creation
-----------------------

Below are different ways to create bot accounts. After the bot account is created, make sure to:

1. Copy the generated bot access token for your integration.
2. Add the bot account to teams and channels you want it to interact in.

User Interface (UI)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Go to **Main Menu > Integrations > Bot Accounts**.
2. Click **Add Bot Account**.
3. Set the **Username** of the bot. Username must begin with a letter, and contain between 3 to 22 lowercase characters made up of numbers, letters, and the symbols ".", "-", and "_".
4. (Optional) Upload an image for the **Bot Icon**. This will be used as the profile image of the bot throughout the Mattermost user interface.
5. (Optional) Set a **Display Name** and **Description**.

> 6. (Optional) Choose what role the bot should have. Defaults to **Member**. If you assign **System Admin**, the bot will have access to write and read any public channels, private channels and direct messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. (Optional) Choose what role the bot should have. Defaults to **Member**. If you assign **System Admin**, the bot will have access to write in and read any public channels, private channels and direct messages.
```

7. (Optional) Select additional permissions for the account. Enable the bot to post to all Mattermost channels, or all Mattermost public channels.

RESTful API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the RESTful API ``POST /bots`` to create a bot. Must have permissions to create bots.

See our `API documentation <https://api.mattermost.com/#tag/bots>`_ to learn more about creating and managing bots through the API.

Command Line Interface (CLI)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can use the following CLI command to convert an existing user account to a bot:

.. code-block:: text

  user convert user@example.com --bot

In addition to email, you may identify the user by its username or user id.

Bot accounts which were converted from user accounts will have their authentication data cleared if they were email/password accounts. Those synced from LDAP/SAML will not have their authentication data cleared so that LDAP/SAML sync performs correctly.

Plugins
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Plugins can create bot accounts through an `EnsureBot` helper function. For an example, see `the Demo Plugin <https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-demo/blob/master/server/configuration.go#L189>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins can create bot accounts through an ``EnsureBot`` helper function. For an example, see `the Demo Plugin <https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-demo/blob/master/server/configuration.go#L189>`_.
```

Bots created by a plugin use the plugin's ID as the creator, unless otherwise specified by the plugin.

Technical Notes
-----------------------

Data Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Each bot account has a row in the **Users** table. The entry is tied to a row in the **Bots** table by a `UserId` column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each bot account has a row in the **Users** table. The entry is tied to a row in the **Bots** table by a ``UserId`` column.
```

> Each bot account has a row in the **Users** table. The entry is tied to a row in the **Bots** table by a ``UserId`` column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each bot account has a row in the **Users** table and the **Bots** table. The entries are tied together by ``User.Id = Bot.UserId``
```

Author: Thanks, updated!

The Bots table schema is described as follows:

.. csv-table::
    :header: "Field", "Description", "Type", "Required"

    "UserId", "User ID of the bot user", "string", "Y"
    "Username", "Username of the bot account", "string", "Y"
    "DisplayName", "Display name of the bot account", "string", "N"
    "Description", "Description of the bot account", "string", "N"    
    "OwnerId", "User ID of the owner of the bot", "string", "Y"
    "CreateAt", "Unix timestamp of creation time", "int64", "Y"
    "UpdateAt", "Unix timestamp of update time", "int64", "Y"
    "DeleteAt", "Unix timestamp of deletion time", "int64", "Y"

> The row in the Users table is used to track the bot’s other data, such as username.

Reviewer 2: Unnecessary. Remove. 
```suggestion
```

Frequently Asked Questions
-----------------------------

Should I migrate all my integrations to use bot accounts?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For your integrations using RESTful API and plugins, yes. To do so, you can either convert an existing account to a bot, or create a new bot account using the steps outlined above.

Once you create a bot account, use the generated token to access the RESTful API on behalf of a bot and interact in the Mattermost server.

For your webhook and slash command integrations, you cannot migrate them to use bot accounts, as they require a user account at this time. However, an option is to migrate the webhooks or slash commands to a plugin, which in turn can use bot accounts.

How do I convert an existing account to a bot account?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the following CLI command to convert an existing user account to a bot:

.. code-block:: text

>   user convert user@example.com --bot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  user convert --bot user@example.com
```

Author: @crspeller Are you sure? In the source code, we give the example as `user convert user@example.com anotherUser --bot`

https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/cmd/mattermost/commands/user.go#L48

Author: Okay, I'll leave it as is then to be consistent with other documented CLI commands and the example given in commands/user.go

If it's conventional to do flags first, then maybe that's something we should update throughout

In addition to email, you may identify the user by its username or user id.

Bot accounts which were converted from user accounts will have their authentication data cleared if they were email/password accounts. Those synced from LDAP/SAML will not have their authentication data cleared so that LDAP/SAML sync performs correctly.

How can I quickly test if my bot account is working?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Add the bot to a team and channel you belong to, then use the following curl command to post with the bot.

> .. code-block:: text

Reviewer: This doesn't render in preview.

Author: Fixed

replacing the following parameters:

- ``<channel-id>`` with the channel you added the bot to
- ``<bot-access-token>`` with the bot access token generated when you created the bot account
- ``<mattermost-url>`` with your Mattermost domain, e.g. ``https://example.mattermost.com``

Do bot access tokens expire?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

No, but you can automate your integration to cycle its token `through the REST API <https://api.mattermost.com/#tag/users%2Fpaths%2F~1users~1%7Buser_id%7D~1tokens%2Fpost>`_.

For more information about access tokens, see :doc:`the personal access tokens documentation <personal-access-tokens>`.

Do bot accounts make it easier to personify someone else such as the CEO or an HR coordinator?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Possibly yes. Currently a System Admin can disable overriding the profile picture and the username from integrations to help prevent personification, but this is not the case for bot accounts.

Mitigations:

> - ``BOT`` tag is used everywhere in the UI where bot accounts are referenced, including messages and user lists.

Reviewer: This doesn't render as a list.

Author: Fixed

- For Direct Message channels, the channel header distinguishes the bot from a regular user account with a ``BOT`` tag.

What happens when a user who owns bot accounts is disabled?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, bot accounts managed by the deactivated user are disabled for enhanced security. Those with permissions to manage bot accounts can re-enable them in **Main Menu > Integrations > Bot Accounts**.

We strongly recommend creating new tokens for the bot, to ensure the user who was deactivated no longer has access to read or write data in the system via the bot access token.

> If you prefer to have bot accounts remain enabled after user deactivation, set ``ServiceSettings.DisableBotsWhenOwnerIsDeactivated`` to ``false`` in your ``config.json`` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to have bot accounts remain enabled after user deactivation, set ``DisableBotsWhenOwnerIsDeactivated`` to ``false`` in your ``config.json`` file.
```

  - Integrations created by a user and tied to a bot account no longer break if the user leaves the company.
  - Once created, bot accounts behave just like regular user accounts and can be added to teams and channels similar to users.
  - Bot accounts are a safer way to integrate with Mattermost through the RESTful API and Plugin API because there is no need to manage shared logins with these accounts.

Note that currently:

  - Bot accounts can only be created or managed by plugins or System Administrators.
  - Bot accounts cannot be assigned to webhooks or slash commands. These must still be created by a user account.
  - Service accounts without an email address pulled from LDAP or SAML systems in Enterprise Edition is not yet supported.

If you would like to see improvements to bot accounts, `let us know in the Feature Proposal Forum <https://mattermost.uservoice.com>`_.

.. contents::
  :backlinks: top
  :depth: 1
  :local:

Configuration Settings
------------------------

By default, plugins can create and manage bot accounts. To enable bot account creation through the user interface or the RESTful API:

1. Go to **System Console > Integrations > Integration Features**.

> 2. Set **Enable Bot Account Creation** to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set **Enable Bot Account Creation** to True.
```

    "DisplayName", "Display name of the bot account", "string", "N"
    "Description", "Description of the bot account", "string", "N"    
    "OwnerId", "User ID of the owner of the bot", "string", "Y"
    "CreateAt", "Unix timestamp of creation time", "int64", "Y"
    "UpdateAt", "Unix timestamp of update time", "int64", "Y"
    "DeleteAt", "Unix timestamp of deletion time", "int64", "Y"

Frequently Asked Questions
-----------------------------

Should I migrate all my integrations to use bot accounts?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For your integrations using RESTful API and plugins, yes. To do so, you can either convert an existing account to a bot, or create a new bot account using the steps outlined above.

Once you create a bot account, use the generated token to access the RESTful API on behalf of a bot and interact in the Mattermost server.

For your webhook and slash command integrations, you cannot migrate them to use bot accounts, as they require a user account at this time. However, an option is to migrate the webhooks or slash commands to a plugin, which in turn can use bot accounts.

> What happens if a plugin is using a bot account that already exists as a user account?

Author: @crspeller FYI, added this to the FAQ.
